blueprints/custom-ami/README.md, before:

# Karpenter Blueprint: Launching nodes using custom AMIs

## Purpose
When you need to launch nodes using a custom AMI that you've created (i.e. to pre-load base container images), you need to configure an `EC2NodeClass` properly to get the AMI you need. With Karpenter, you might be able to use AMIs for different CPU architectures or other specifications like GPUs. So, our recommendation is that you use a naming convention or a tag to easily identify which AMIs Karpenter can use to launch nodes.

## Requirements

* A custom AMI to use (for this example, we'll skip this requirement)
* An EKS Cluster name with Karpenter installed. You can use the blueprint we've used to test this pattern at the `cluster` folder in the root of this repository.
* An IAM Role name that Karpenter nodes will use

## Deploy

If you're using the Terraform template provided in this repo, run the following commands to get the EKS cluster name and the IAM Role name for the Karpenter nodes:

```
export CLUSTER_NAME=$(terraform -chdir="../../cluster/terraform" output -raw cluster_name)
export KARPENTER_NODE_IAM_ROLE_NAME=$(terraform -chdir="../../cluster/terraform" output -raw node_instance_role_name)
```

> ***NOTE***: If you're not using Terraform, you need to get those values manually. `CLUSTER_NAME` is the name of your EKS cluster (not the ARN). Karpenter auto-generates the [instance profile](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/id_roles_use_switch-role-ec2_instance-profiles) in your `EC2NodeClass` given the role that you specify in [spec.role](https://karpenter.sh/preview/concepts/nodeclasses/) with the placeholder `KARPENTER_NODE_IAM_ROLE_NAME`, which is a way to pass a single IAM role to the EC2 instance launched by the Karpenter `NodePool`. Typically, the instance profile name is the same as the IAM role(not the ARN).


Now, make sure you're in this blueprint folder, then run the following command:

```
sed -i '' "s/<<CLUSTER_NAME>>/$CLUSTER_NAME/g" custom-ami.yaml
sed -i '' "s/<<KARPENTER_NODE_IAM_ROLE_NAME>>/$KARPENTER_NODE_IAM_ROLE_NAME/g" custom-ami.yaml
kubectl apply -f .
```

Here's the important configuration block within the spec of an [`EC2NodeClass`](https://karpenter.sh/preview/concepts/nodeclasses/#specamiselectorterms): **spec.amiSelectorTerms**

`amiSelectorTerms` are required and are used to configure AMIs for Karpenter to use. AMIs are discovered through alias, id, owner, name, and [tags](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/Using_Tags.html).

If amiSelectorTerms match more than one AMI, Karpenter will automatically determine which AMI best fits the workloads on the launched worker node under the following constraints:

- When launching nodes, Karpenter automatically determines which architecture a custom AMI is compatible with and will use images that match an instanceType’s requirements.
  - Unless using an alias, Karpenter cannot detect requirements other than architecture. If you need to specify different AMIs for different kind of nodes (e.g. accelerated GPU AMIs), you should use a separate EC2NodeClass.
- If multiple AMIs are found that can be used, Karpenter will choose the latest one.
- If no AMIs are found that can be used, then no nodes will be provisioned.

To select an AMI by name, use the `name` field in the selector term. To select an AMI by id, use the `id` field in the selector term. To ensure that AMIs are owned by the expected owner, use the `owner` field - you can use a combination of account aliases (e.g. self amazon, your-aws-account-name) and account IDs. If this is not set, it defaults to `self,amazon`.

> **Tip**
> AMIs may be specified by any AWS tag, including Name. Selecting by tag
> or by name using wildcards (*) is supported.

```
  amiSelectorTerms:
    - name: "*amazon-eks-node-1.30-*"
      owner: self
    - name: "*amazon-eks-node-1.30-*"
      owner: amazon
```

***IMPORTANT NOTE:*** With this configuration, you're saying that you need to use the latest AMI available for an EKS cluster v1.30 which is either owned by you (customized) or Amazon (official image). We're  using a regular expression to have the flexibility to use AMIs for either `x86` or `Arm`, workloads that need GPUs, or a nodes with different OS like `Windows`. You're basically letting the workload (pod) to decide which type of node(s) it needs. If you don't have a custom AMI created by you in your account, Karpenter will use the official EKS AMI owned by Amazon.

## Results
After waiting for about one minute, you should see a machine ready, and all pods in a `Running` state, like this:

```
❯ kubectl get pods
NAME                         READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
custom-ami-bdf66b777-2g27q   1/1     Running   0          2m2s
custom-ami-bdf66b777-dbkls   1/1     Running   0          2m2s
custom-ami-bdf66b777-rzlsz   1/1     Running   0          2m2s
❯ kubectl get nodeclaims
NAME               TYPE          CAPACITY    ZONE         NODE                                         READY   AGE
custom-ami-jhdbh   c5a.large     spot        eu-west-2c   ip-10-0-117-230.eu-west-2.compute.internal   True    114s
```

## Cleanup
To remove all objects created, simply run the following commands:

```
kubectl delete -f .
```

Commit message:

Update Dependencies and Kubernetes Version v1.5.0 EKS 1.32 (#25)
* updated modules and cluster version. tested each blueprint

* testing and guide required

* baseline instances for test

* update Readmd

* updated blueprints and versions

* version pinning

---------

Co-authored-by: jakesky <jakesky@amazon.com>

blueprints/custom-ami/README.md, after:

# Karpenter Blueprint: Launching nodes using custom AMIs

## Purpose
When you need to launch nodes using a custom AMI that you've created (i.e. to pre-load base container images), you need to configure an `EC2NodeClass` properly to get the AMI you need. With Karpenter, you might be able to use AMIs for different CPU architectures or other specifications like GPUs. So, our recommendation is that you use a naming convention or a tag to easily identify which AMIs Karpenter can use to launch nodes.

## Requirements

* A custom AMI to use (for this example, we'll skip this requirement)
* An EKS Cluster name with Karpenter installed. You can use the blueprint we've used to test this pattern at the `cluster` folder in the root of this repository.
* An IAM Role name that Karpenter nodes will use

## Deploy

If you're using the Terraform template provided in this repo, run the following commands to get the EKS cluster name and the IAM Role name for the Karpenter nodes:

```
export CLUSTER_NAME=$(terraform -chdir="../../cluster/terraform" output -raw cluster_name)
export KARPENTER_NODE_IAM_ROLE_NAME=$(terraform -chdir="../../cluster/terraform" output -raw node_instance_role_name)
```

> ***NOTE***: If you're not using Terraform, you need to get those values manually. `CLUSTER_NAME` is the name of your EKS cluster (not the ARN). Karpenter auto-generates the [instance profile](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/id_roles_use_switch-role-ec2_instance-profiles) in your `EC2NodeClass` given the role that you specify in [spec.role](https://karpenter.sh/preview/concepts/nodeclasses/) with the placeholder `KARPENTER_NODE_IAM_ROLE_NAME`, which is a way to pass a single IAM role to the EC2 instance launched by the Karpenter `NodePool`. Typically, the instance profile name is the same as the IAM role(not the ARN).


Now, make sure you're in this blueprint folder, then run the following command:

```
sed -i '' "s/<<CLUSTER_NAME>>/$CLUSTER_NAME/g" custom-ami.yaml
sed -i '' "s/<<KARPENTER_NODE_IAM_ROLE_NAME>>/$KARPENTER_NODE_IAM_ROLE_NAME/g" custom-ami.yaml
kubectl apply -f .
```

Here's the important configuration block within the spec of an [`EC2NodeClass`](https://karpenter.sh/preview/concepts/nodeclasses/#specamiselectorterms): **spec.amiSelectorTerms**

`amiSelectorTerms` are required and are used to configure AMIs for Karpenter to use. AMIs are discovered through alias, id, owner, name, and [tags](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/Using_Tags.html).

If amiSelectorTerms match more than one AMI, Karpenter will automatically determine which AMI best fits the workloads on the launched worker node under the following constraints:

- When launching nodes, Karpenter automatically determines which architecture a custom AMI is compatible with and will use images that match an instanceType's requirements.
  - Unless using an alias, Karpenter cannot detect requirements other than architecture. If you need to specify different AMIs for different kind of nodes (e.g. accelerated GPU AMIs), you should use a separate EC2NodeClass.
- If multiple AMIs are found that can be used, Karpenter will choose the latest one.
- If no AMIs are found that can be used, then no nodes will be provisioned.

To select an AMI by name, use the `name` field in the selector term. To select an AMI by id, use the `id` field in the selector term. To select an AMI using an alias, use the `alias` field which supports version pinning (e.g. `al2023@v20240807`) or latest version (`al2023@latest`). To ensure that AMIs are owned by the expected owner, use the `owner` field - you can use a combination of account aliases (e.g. self amazon, your-aws-account-name) and account IDs. If this is not set, it defaults to `self,amazon`.

> **Tip**
> AMIs may be specified by any AWS tag, including Name. Selecting by tag
> or by name using wildcards (*) is supported.

```yaml
  amiSelectorTerms:
    - name: "*amazon-eks-node-al2023*"
      owner: self
    - name: "*amazon-eks-node-al2023*"
      owner: amazon
```

***IMPORTANT NOTE:*** With this configuration, you're saying that you need to use the latest AMI available for an EKS cluster v1.32 which is either owned by you (customized) or Amazon (official image). We're  using a regular expression to have the flexibility to use AMIs for either `x86` or `Arm`, workloads that need GPUs, or a nodes with different OS like `Windows`. You're basically letting the workload (pod) to decide which type of node(s) it needs. If you don't have a custom AMI created by you in your account, Karpenter will use the official EKS AMI owned by Amazon.

## Results
After waiting for about one minute, you should see a machine ready, and all pods in a `Running` state, like this:

```
❯ kubectl get pods
NAME                         READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
custom-ami-bdf66b777-2g27q   1/1     Running   0          2m2s
custom-ami-bdf66b777-dbkls   1/1     Running   0          2m2s
custom-ami-bdf66b777-rzlsz   1/1     Running   0          2m2s
❯ kubectl get nodeclaims
NAME               TYPE          CAPACITY    ZONE         NODE                                         READY   AGE
custom-ami-jhdbh   c5a.large     spot        eu-west-2c   ip-10-0-117-230.eu-west-2.compute.internal   True    114s
```

## Cleanup
To remove all objects created, simply run the following commands:

```
kubectl delete -f .
```
