blueprints/od-spot-split/README.md, before:

# Karpenter Blueprint: Split Between On-Demand & Spot Instances

## Purpose

This setup works if you're interested in having a portion the EKS nodes running using On-Demand instances, and another portion on Spot. For example, a split of 20% On-Demand, and 80% on Spot. You're can take advantage of the labels Karpenter adds automatically to each node, and use [Topology Spread Constraints (TSC)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/topology-spread-constraints/) within a `Deployment` or `Pod` to split capacity in a desired ratio.

To do this, you can create a provisioner each for Spot and On-Demand with disjoint values for a unique new label called `capacity-spread`. Then, assign values to this label to configure the split. If you'd like to have a 20/80 split, you could add the values `["2","3","4","5"]` for the Spot provisioner, and `["1"]` for the On-Demand provisioner.

## Requirements

* A Kubernetes cluster with Karpenter installed. You can use the blueprint we've used to test this pattern at the `cluster` folder in the root of this repository.
* A `default` Karpenter provisioner as that's the one we'll use in this blueprint. You did this already in the ["Deploy a Karpenter Default Provisioner"](../../README.md) section from this repository.

## Deploy
To deploy the Karpenter `Provisioner` and the sample `workload`, simply run this command:

```
kubectl apply -f .
```

You should see the following output:

```
provisioner.karpenter.sh/node-od created
provisioner.karpenter.sh/node-spot created
deployment.apps/workload-split created
```

## Results

You can review the Karpenter logs and watch how it's deciding to launch multiple nodes following the workload constraints:

```
kubectl -n karpenter logs -l app.kubernetes.io/name=karpenter --all-containers=true -f --tail=20
```

Wait one minute and you should see the pods running within multiple nodes, run this command:

```
kubectl get nodes -L karpenter.sh/capacity-type,beta.kubernetes.io/instance-type,karpenter.sh/provisioner-name,topology.kubernetes.io/zone -l karpenter.sh/initialized=true
```

You should see an output similar to this:

```
NAME                                         STATUS   ROLES    AGE   VERSION               CAPACITY-TYPE   INSTANCE-TYPE   PROVISIONER-NAME   ZONE
ip-10-0-103-229.eu-west-1.compute.internal   Ready    <none>   42s   v1.27.5-eks-43840fb   spot            c5.large        node-spot          eu-west-1c
ip-10-0-33-163.eu-west-1.compute.internal    Ready    <none>   26s   v1.27.5-eks-43840fb   spot            c7a.medium      node-spot          eu-west-1a
ip-10-0-40-137.eu-west-1.compute.internal    Ready    <none>   49s   v1.27.5-eks-43840fb   spot            c7a.medium      node-spot          eu-west-1a
ip-10-0-45-167.eu-west-1.compute.internal    Ready    <none>   49s   v1.27.5-eks-43840fb   spot            c7a.medium      node-spot          eu-west-1a
ip-10-0-50-176.eu-west-1.compute.internal    Ready    <none>   40s   v1.27.5-eks-43840fb   spot            c7a.medium      node-spot          eu-west-1a
ip-10-0-53-132.eu-west-1.compute.internal    Ready    <none>   48s   v1.27.5-eks-43840fb   on-demand       c7a.medium      node-od            eu-west-1a
ip-10-0-54-108.eu-west-1.compute.internal    Ready    <none>   48s   v1.27.5-eks-43840fb   spot            c7a.medium      node-spot          eu-west-1a
ip-10-0-58-153.eu-west-1.compute.internal    Ready    <none>   39s   v1.27.5-eks-43840fb   on-demand       c7a.medium      node-od            eu-west-1a
ip-10-0-59-78.eu-west-1.compute.internal     Ready    <none>   31s   v1.27.5-eks-43840fb   spot            m7a.medium      node-spot          eu-west-1a
```

As you can see, pods were spread within the `spot` and `od` provisioners because of the `capacity-spread` TSC:

```
      topologySpreadConstraints:
        - labelSelector:
            matchLabels:
              app: workload-split
          maxSkew: 1
          topologyKey: capacity-spread
          whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule
```

And each provisioner has a weight configured, the `od` provisioner has the following requirement:

```
    - key: capacity-spread
      operator: In
      values: ["1"]
```

And the `spot` has the following requirement:

```
    - key: capacity-spread
      operator: In
      values: ["2","3","4","5"]
```

## Cleanup

```
kubectl delete -f workload.yaml
kubectl delete -f od-spot.yaml
```

Commit message:

Karpenter version 0.32.X release (#4)
* NodePool EC2NodeClass added

* reference blueprint changes

* add consolodate when under utilized

* update Readme

* Add scoped polices to Karpenter role

* kublet config and readme update

* reduce reserved resource and remove isance profile creation

* formatting

* iam removed -changes made upstream

* Fixed problems with new version of Karpenter addon

* blueprints added

* Readme udpdated

Blueprints require testing

* added output and updated blueprints, Readme

* Added some fixes to the docs and TF files

* Fixed problems with the userdata blueprint

* Added the placeholders

* Trying to fix problems with the drift blueprint

* Fixed problems with the drift blueprint

* Fixed instructions to get the CLUSTER_NAME and IAM instance profile values.

* Updated the drift blueprint README

* Added a delete command for all Karpenter resources when cleaning up

---------

Co-authored-by: jakeskyaws <jakesky@amazon.com>
Co-authored-by: Christian Melendez <chrismld@amazon.com>

blueprints/od-spot-split/README.md, after:

# Karpenter Blueprint: Split Between On-Demand & Spot Instances

## Purpose

This setup works if you're interested in having a portion the EKS nodes running using On-Demand instances, and another portion on Spot. For example, a split of 20% On-Demand, and 80% on Spot. You're can take advantage of the labels Karpenter adds automatically to each node, and use [Topology Spread Constraints (TSC)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/topology-spread-constraints/) within a `Deployment` or `Pod` to split capacity in a desired ratio.

To do this, you can create a NodePool each for Spot and On-Demand with disjoint values for a unique new label called `capacity-spread`. Then, assign values to this label to configure the split. If you'd like to have a 20/80 split, you could add the values `["2","3","4","5"]` for the Spot NodePool, and `["1"]` for the On-Demand NodePool.

## Requirements

* A Kubernetes cluster with Karpenter installed. You can use the blueprint we've used to test this pattern at the `cluster` folder in the root of this repository.
* A `default` Karpenter NodePool as that's the one we'll use in this blueprint. You did this already in the ["Deploy a Karpenter Default EC2NodeClass and NodePool"](../../README.md) section from this repository.

## Deploy
To deploy the Karpenter `NodePool` and the sample `workload`, simply run this command:

```
kubectl apply -f .
```

You should see the following output:

```
nodepool.karpenter.sh/node-od created
nodepool.karpenter.sh/node-spot created
deployment.apps/workload-split created
```

## Results

You can review the Karpenter logs and watch how it's deciding to launch multiple nodes following the workload constraints:

```
kubectl -n karpenter logs -l app.kubernetes.io/name=karpenter --all-containers=true -f --tail=20
```

Wait one minute and you should see the pods running within multiple nodes, run this command:

```
kubectl get nodes -L karpenter.sh/capacity-type,beta.kubernetes.io/instance-type,karpenter.sh/nodepool,topology.kubernetes.io/zone -l karpenter.sh/initialized=true
```

You should see an output similar to this:

```
NAME                                         STATUS   ROLES    AGE   VERSION               CAPACITY-TYPE   INSTANCE-TYPE   NODEPOOL   ZONE
ip-10-0-103-229.eu-west-1.compute.internal   Ready    <none>   42s   v1.28.3-eks-4f4795d   spot            c5.large        node-spot          eu-west-1c
ip-10-0-33-163.eu-west-1.compute.internal    Ready    <none>   26s   v1.28.3-eks-4f4795d   spot            c7a.medium      node-spot          eu-west-1a
ip-10-0-40-137.eu-west-1.compute.internal    Ready    <none>   49s   v1.28.3-eks-4f4795d   spot            c7a.medium      node-spot          eu-west-1a
ip-10-0-45-167.eu-west-1.compute.internal    Ready    <none>   49s   v1.28.3-eks-4f4795d   spot            c7a.medium      node-spot          eu-west-1a
ip-10-0-50-176.eu-west-1.compute.internal    Ready    <none>   40s   v1.28.3-eks-4f4795d   spot            c7a.medium      node-spot          eu-west-1a
ip-10-0-53-132.eu-west-1.compute.internal    Ready    <none>   48s   v1.28.3-eks-4f4795d   on-demand       c7a.medium      node-od            eu-west-1a
ip-10-0-54-108.eu-west-1.compute.internal    Ready    <none>   48s   v1.28.3-eks-4f4795d   spot            c7a.medium      node-spot          eu-west-1a
ip-10-0-58-153.eu-west-1.compute.internal    Ready    <none>   39s   v1.28.3-eks-4f4795d   on-demand       c7a.medium      node-od            eu-west-1a
ip-10-0-59-78.eu-west-1.compute.internal     Ready    <none>   31s   v1.28.3-eks-4f4795d   spot            m7a.medium      node-spot          eu-west-1a
```

As you can see, pods were spread within the `spot` and `od` nodepools because of the `capacity-spread` TSC:

```
      topologySpreadConstraints:
        - labelSelector:
            matchLabels:
              app: workload-split
          maxSkew: 1
          topologyKey: capacity-spread
          whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule
```

And each `NodePool` has a weight configured, the `od` NodePool has the following requirement:

```
    - key: capacity-spread
      operator: In
      values: ["1"]
```

And the `spot` has the following requirement:

```
    - key: capacity-spread
      operator: In
      values: ["2","3","4","5"]
```

## Cleanup

```
kubectl delete -f workload.yaml
kubectl delete -f od-spot.yaml
```
