blueprints/userdata/README.md, before:


# Karpenter Blueprint: Customizing nodes with your own User Data automation

  

## Purpose

When you need to bootstrap the data plane nodes to either overwrite certain Kubernetes settings, mount volumes or anything else you need to do when a node is launched. Within the `EC2NodeClass` there's a `userData` field you can use to control the [user data](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/user-data.html) that is applied to your worker nodes. This way, you can continue using the [EKS optimized AMI](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/eks-optimized-ami.html) with any additional configuration you need to run on top of the base AMI.

  

## Requirements

  

* A Kubernetes cluster with Karpenter installed. You can use the blueprint we've used to test this pattern at the `cluster` folder in the root of this repository.

  

## Deploy

You need to create a new `EC2NodeClass` with the `userData` field, along with a `NodePool` to use this new template.

  

If you're using the Terraform template provided in this repo, run the following commands to get the EKS cluster name and the IAM Role name for the Karpenter nodes:

  

```
export CLUSTER_NAME=$(terraform -chdir="../../cluster/terraform" output -raw cluster_name)
```
  
>  **Note:** If you are using the terraform-aws-eks-blueprints-addons module, you can access the `KARPENTER_NODE_IAM_ROLE_NAME` by using the output variable module.eks_blueprints_addons.karpenter.node_iam_role_name.
>
>Alternatively, you can manually locate the instance profile name in the AWS Identity and Access Management (IAM) Console by following these steps:
>
>- Navigate to the AWS IAM Console.
>
>  - Locate the specific IAM role that you intend to use with Karpenter (not the role's ARN).

Now, make sure you're in this blueprint folder, then run the following command to create the new `EC2NodeClass` and `NodePool`:

```
sed -i "s/<<CLUSTER_NAME>>/$CLUSTER_NAME/g" userdata.yaml
sed -i "s/<<KARPENTER_NODE_IAM_ROLE_NAME>>/$KARPENTER_NODE_IAM_ROLE_NAME/g" userdata.yaml
kubectl apply -f .

```
 

## Results

The pods from the sample workload should be running:

  

```

> kubectl get pods

NAME READY STATUS RESTARTS AGE

userdata-7fbcdd685-4429h 1/1 Running 0 45s

userdata-7fbcdd685-8dcn4 1/1 Running 0 45s

userdata-7fbcdd685-qg75z 1/1 Running 0 45s

```

  

You can confirm the Kubernetes settings have been added to the user data of the instance by running this command:

  

```

aws ec2 describe-instance-attribute --instance-id $(aws ec2 describe-instances --filters 'Name=tag:Name,Values=karpenter.sh/nodepool/userdata' --output text --query 'Reservations[*].Instances[*].InstanceId') --attribute userData --query 'UserData.Value' | sed 's/"//g' | base64 --decode

```

  

You should get an output like this with the `[settings.kubernetes]` configured in the `EC2NodeClass`:

  

```

MIME-Version: 1.0

Content-Type: multipart/mixed; boundary="//"

  

--//

Content-Type: text/x-shellscript; charset="us-ascii"

  

#!/bin/bash

echo $(jq '.containerLogMaxFiles=10|.containerLogMaxSize="100Mi"' /etc/kubernetes/kubelet/kubelet-config.json) > /etc/kubernetes/kubelet/kubelet-config.json

  

--//

Content-Type: text/x-shellscript; charset="us-ascii"

...

```

  

## Cleanup

To remove all objects created, simply run the following commands:

  

```

kubectl delete -f .

```

Commit message:

added output and updated blueprints, Readme

blueprints/userdata/README.md, after:


# Karpenter Blueprint: Customizing nodes with your own User Data automation

  

## Purpose

When you need to bootstrap the data plane nodes to either overwrite certain Kubernetes settings, mount volumes or anything else you need to do when a node is launched. Within the `EC2NodeClass` there's a `userData` field you can use to control the [user data](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/user-data.html) that is applied to your worker nodes. This way, you can continue using the [EKS optimized AMI](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/eks-optimized-ami.html) with any additional configuration you need to run on top of the base AMI.

  

## Requirements

  

* A Kubernetes cluster with Karpenter installed. You can use the blueprint we've used to test this pattern at the `cluster` folder in the root of this repository.


## Deploy

You need to create a new `EC2NodeClass` with the `userData` field, along with a `NodePool` to use this new template.

If you're using the Terraform template provided in this repo, run the following commands to get the EKS cluster name and the IAM Role name for the Karpenter nodes:

```
export CLUSTER_NAME=$(terraform -chdir="../../cluster/terraform" output -raw cluster_name)
export KARPENTER_NODE_IAM_ROLE_NAME=$(terraform -chdir="../../cluster/terraform" output -raw node_instance_role_name)
```

> ***NOTE***: If you're not using Terraform, you need to get those values manually. `CLUSTER_NAME` is the name of your EKS cluster (not the ARN). Karpenter auto-generates the [instance profile](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/id_roles_use_switch-role-ec2_instance-profiles) in your `EC2NodeClass` given the role that you specify in [spec.role](https://karpenter.sh/preview/concepts/nodeclasses/). which is a way to pass a single IAM role to the EC2 instance launched by the Karpenter `NodePool`. Typically, the instance profile name is the same as the IAM role(not the ARN).


Now, make sure you're in this blueprint folder, then run the following command to create the new `EC2NodeClass` and `NodePool`:

```
sed -i '' "s/<<CLUSTER_NAME>>/$CLUSTER_NAME/g" userdata.yaml
sed -i '' "s/<<KARPENTER_NODE_IAM_ROLE_NAME>>/$KARPENTER_NODE_IAM_ROLE_NAME/g" userdata.yaml
kubectl apply -f .

```
 

## Results

The pods from the sample workload should be running:

  

```

> kubectl get pods

NAME READY STATUS RESTARTS AGE

userdata-7fbcdd685-4429h 1/1 Running 0 45s

userdata-7fbcdd685-8dcn4 1/1 Running 0 45s

userdata-7fbcdd685-qg75z 1/1 Running 0 45s

```

  

You can confirm the Kubernetes settings have been added to the user data of the instance by running this command:

  

```

aws ec2 describe-instance-attribute --instance-id $(aws ec2 describe-instances --filters 'Name=tag:Name,Values=karpenter.sh/nodepool/userdata' --output text --query 'Reservations[*].Instances[*].InstanceId') --attribute userData --query 'UserData.Value' | sed 's/"//g' | base64 --decode

```

  

You should get an output like this with the `[settings.kubernetes]` configured in the `EC2NodeClass`:

  

```

MIME-Version: 1.0

Content-Type: multipart/mixed; boundary="//"

  

--//

Content-Type: text/x-shellscript; charset="us-ascii"

  

#!/bin/bash

echo $(jq '.containerLogMaxFiles=10|.containerLogMaxSize="100Mi"' /etc/kubernetes/kubelet/kubelet-config.json) > /etc/kubernetes/kubelet/kubelet-config.json

  

--//

Content-Type: text/x-shellscript; charset="us-ascii"

...

```

  

## Cleanup

To remove all objects created, simply run the following commands:

  

```

kubectl delete -f .

```
